# Getting started with client libraries

The Google Cloud Libraries for .NET are [a mixture of handwritten and autogenerated
libraries](library-types.md) connecting to Google Cloud services. The handwritten libraries (such
as [Google.Cloud.Firestore](https://cloud.google.com/dotnet/docs/reference/Google.Cloud.Firestore/latest) and
[Google.Cloud.Spanner.Data](https://cloud.google.com/dotnet/docs/reference/Google.Cloud.Spanner.Data/latest))
are mostly higher level abstractions over the underlying API. See the documentation
for those individual libraries for details; the documentation here is primarily
aimed at the autogenerated libraries.

If you haven't already found the library for the API you're interested in, please consult
[the list of .NET libraries](https://cloud.google.com/dotnet/docs/reference) which shows both the NuGet package
name and the link to the library-specific documentation. In particular, each library has:

- A "getting started" page which lists the client types within that library
- Version history for the library
- API reference documentation

This page demonstrates using the [Google.Cloud.Translate.V3](https://cloud.google.com/dotnet/docs/reference/Google.Cloud.Translate.V3/latest)
API as a simple example; the steps required for other APIs are very similar.

## Prerequisites

All Google Cloud APIs require a Google Cloud project. If you haven't set one up already,
please [create one](https://cloud.devsite.corp.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects).
You'll also need to [enable your chosen API](https://console.cloud.google.com/apis/library) if it hasn't
already been used within that Google Cloud project.

There are no specific tools required to develop using the Google Cloud Libraries for .NET. All
development environments should work, but you should check that you're targeting a
[supported platform](platforms.md).

We recommend installing the [gcloud CLI](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud).

## Install the library

All Google Cloud Libraries for .NET are available from [nuget.org](https://nuget.org) and can be installed
using any NuGet package manager. If the version you wish to is install a pre-release version,
please ensure you enable pre-release packages (for example, in the Visual Studio NuGet user interface,
check the "Include prerelease" box).

The libraries can be installed in any regular project type - for example, console applications,
GUI applications such as WinForms and WPF, ASP.NET Core applications, and class libraries.

For the translation example, we'll create a console application using the `dotnet` tooling
and install the package.

Note that for simplicity, the sample code below uses synchronous calls - but all methods have asynchronous equivalents,
including client construction. Within naturally asynchronous environments such as web applications,
we recommend the use of the asynchronous methods.

```sh
mkdir TranslationExample
cd TranslationExample
dotnet new console
dotnet add package Google.Cloud.Translate.V3
```

> **Dependencies**  
> If you install the library in an interactive environment such as Visual Studio, you may notice
> a lot of transitive dependencies being installed. This is entirely expected, but you may not recognize
> some of those dependencies. The list below is not comprehensive, but highlights some of the packages
> you'll see being installed.
>
> - Google.Protobuf: the library supporting the [Protocol Buffers](https://protobuf.dev) seralization format
> - Google.Api.Gax, Google.Api.Gax.Grpc: support libraries specifically tailored for the Google Cloud client libraries
> - Google.Apis.Auth, Google.Apis, Google.Apis.Core: authentication support for Google Cloud Platform credentials
> - Grpc.Auth, Grpc.Core.Api, Grpc.Net.Client, Grpc.Net.Common: support for the [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) RPC protocol
> - Google.LongRunning: support for [long-running operations](long-running-operations.md)

## Create a client

The first step in making any API calls is to create a client. Some libraries have multiple clients
for operations involving different resources; others have a single client. In the Translation API
we're using, there's just `TranslationServiceClient`.

Clients can be configured in a number of ways, but in many cases the defaults are fine. The most
common reason to use explicit configuration is to use specific credentials for
[authentication](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/getting-started). For this example, we'll just use the
[application default credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/production#automatically).

Each client class has static `Create` and `CreateAsync` methods to create clients using all the default settings.
So in this case we can just use:

```csharp
using Google.Cloud.Translate.V3;

var client = TranslationServiceClient.Create();
```

In applications that use dependency injection via Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection, we recommend
using dependency injection for client construction. See the
[client lifecycle documentation on dependency injection](client-lifecycle.md##dependency-injection-microsoftextensionsdependencyinjection)
for details.

## Make requests

The Google Cloud Libraries use [Protocol Buffers](https://protobuf.dev)
to represent requests and responses, with some additional types to make the APIs more
convenient to work with.

Most APIs are expressed in terms of a single request returning a single response, although
there are also some streaming APIs involving multiple requests and/or multiple responses.
For our Translation API example, we'll create a simple request for the `TranslateText` API.

```csharp
using Google.Api.Gax.ResourceNames;

...

string projectId = "your-project-id-here";
string locationId = "global";
var request = new TranslateTextRequest
{
    Contents = { "It is raining.", "It is sunny." },
    TargetLanguageCode = "fr-FR",
    ParentAsLocationName = new LocationName(projectId, locationId)
};
var response = client.TranslateText(request);
```

This example demonstrates a few features:

- Protocol Buffer messages always have parameterless constructors and support object initializers
- The `Contents` property is a read-only property of type `RepeatedField<string>` - the code above
  doesn't assign a new value to the property; instead it uses a collection initializer to populate
  the repeated field
- The Translate library has added an extra `ParentAsLocationName` property to the message.
  There's a `Parent` property which is just of type `string`, but using `ParentAsLocationName`
  allows resource names to be handled in a type-safe manner, and you don't need to concern yourself
  with the underlying resource name format. For more details, see the
  [resource names documentation](resource-names.md).

The Google Cloud Libraries always expose methods accepting an API request directly,
but in some cases additional overloads are provided for convenience. In this particular case, we could have used:

```csharp
var response = client.TranslateText(
    new LocationName(projectId, locationId),
    "fr-FR",
    new[] { "It is raining.", "It is sunny." });
```

The convenience methods don't always cover all possible aspects of the request.
For example, `TranslateTextRequest` has a `MimeType` property which can easily be set when
using the code creating a full request, but can't be specified in the convenience method.

The response is also a Protocol Buffers message. Calling `ToString()` on any message will return the JSON
representation of the message, which can be useful to see the structure of a response when using a specific
API for the first time. In this case we'll just look at the `Translations` property though:

```csharp
Console.WriteLine($"Translations returned: {response.Translations.Count}");
Console.WriteLine();
foreach (var translation in response.Translations)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Detected language: {translation.DetectedLanguageCode}");
    Console.WriteLine($"Translated text: {translation.TranslatedText}");
    Console.WriteLine();
}
```

This produces output of:

```text
Translations returned: 2

Detected language: en
Translated text: Il pleut.

Detected language: en
Translated text: Il fait beau.
```

The complete code is:

```csharp
using Google.Api.Gax.ResourceNames;
using Google.Cloud.Translate.V3;

var client = TranslationServiceClient.Create();

string projectId = "your-project-id-here";
string locationId = "global";
var request = new TranslateTextRequest
{
    Contents = { "It is raining.", "It is sunny." },
    TargetLanguageCode = "fr-FR",
    ParentAsLocationName = new LocationName(projectId, locationId)
};

var response = client.TranslateText(request);

Console.WriteLine($"Translations returned: {response.Translations.Count}");
Console.WriteLine();
foreach (var translation in response.Translations)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Detected language: {translation.DetectedLanguageCode}");
    Console.WriteLine($"Translated text: {translation.TranslatedText}");
    Console.WriteLine();
}
```

This is just a simple example, which hasn't touched on [page streaming](page-streaming.md)
or [specifying call settings](call-settings.md) for example.

## Getting help

If you run into problems with the Google Cloud Libraries for .NET, help is available.
Please read the [Support guide](support.md) for more information about the most effective way
to ask for help.